Adds initial streaming subscriptions docs (#4225)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/building-blocks/pubsub/subscription-methods.md

---
type: docs

> title: "Declarative, streaming and programmatic subscription methods"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Declarative, streaming, and programmatic subscription methods"
```

> title: "Declarative, streaming, and programmatic subscription methods"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Declarative, streaming, and programmatic subscription types"
```

> linkTitle: "Subscription methods"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "Subscription types"
```

weight: 3000

> description: "Learn more about the methods by which Dapr allows you to subscribe to topics."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Learn more about the subscription types that allow you to subscribe to message topics."
```

---

> ## Pub/sub API subscription methods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Pub/sub API subscription types
```

> Dapr applications can subscribe to published topics via three methods that support the same features: declarative and programmatic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dapr applications can subscribe to published topics via three methods that support the same features: declarative, streaming and programmatic.
```

> Dapr applications can subscribe to published topics via three methods that support the same features: declarative, streaming and programmatic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dapr applications can subscribe to published topics via three subscription types that support the same features: declarative, streaming and programmatic.
```

> | Subscription method | Description |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Subscription type | Description |
```

| ------------------- | ----------- |
| [**Declarative**]({{< ref "subscription-methods.md#declarative-subscriptions" >}}) | Subscription is defined in an **external file**. The declarative approach removes the Dapr dependency from your code and allows for existing applications to subscribe to topics, without having to change code. |

> | [**Streaming**]({{< ref "subscription-methods.md#streaming-subscriptions" >}}) | Subscription is defined in the **application code**. Streaming subscriptions are dynamic in that they allow for adding or removing subscriptions at runtime. Doesn't require an app to be configured. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [**Streaming**]({{< ref "subscription-methods.md#streaming-subscriptions" >}}) | Subscription is defined in the **application code**. Streaming subscriptions are dynamic, meaning they allow for adding or removing subscriptions at runtime. Doesn't require an app to be configured. |
```

> | [**Streaming**]({{< ref "subscription-methods.md#streaming-subscriptions" >}}) | Subscription is defined in the **application code**. Streaming subscriptions are dynamic, meaning they allow for adding or removing subscriptions at runtime. Doesn't require an app to be configured. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [**Streaming**]({{< ref "subscription-methods.md#streaming-subscriptions" >}}) | Subscription is defined in the **application code**. Streaming subscriptions are dynamic, meaning they allow for adding or removing subscriptions at runtime. They do not require a subscription endpoint in your application (that is required by both programmatic and declarative subscriptions), making them easy to configure in code. Streaming subscriptions also do not require an app to be configured with the sidecar to receive messages. |
```

> | [**Programmatic**]({{< ref "subscription-methods.md#programmatic-subscriptions" >}}) | Subscription is defined in the **application code**. The programmatic approach implements the static subscription in your code. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [**Programmatic**]({{< ref "subscription-methods.md#programmatic-subscriptions" >}}) | Subscription is defined in the **application code**. The programmatic approach implements the static subscription and requires an endpoint in your code. |
```

The `/checkout` endpoint matches the `route` defined in the subscriptions and this is where Dapr sends all topic messages to.

### Streaming subscriptions

> Streaming subscriptions are subscriptions defined in application code which can be dynamically stopped and started at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Streaming subscriptions are subscriptions defined in application code that can be dynamically stopped and started at runtime.
```

> Messages are pulled by the application from Dapr meaning no endpoint is needed to subscribe to a topic, and is possible to subscribe without any app configured on the sidecar at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Messages are pulled by the application from Dapr. This means no endpoint is needed to subscribe to a topic, and it's possible to subscribe without any app configured on the sidecar at all.
```

> Any number of PubSubs and topics can be subscribed to at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any number of pubsubs and topics can be subscribed to at once.
```

As messages are sent to the given message handler code, there is no concept of routes or bulk subscriptions.

> 

Reviewer 2: Given the "there is no concept of routes or bulk subscriptions" Can you update this sentence 

"This feature is available to both the [declarative and programmatic subscription approaches], however does not apply to streaming subscriptions. "

in this doc 
https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/pubsub/howto-route-messages/

And need to update here https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/pubsub/pubsub-bulk/#subscribing-messages-in-bulk to say that this does not apply to streaming subscriptions in the text.

Author: @msfussell Please take a look!

> > **Note:** Only a single PubSub/Topic pair per application may be subscribed at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Only a single pubsub/topic pair per application may be subscribed at a time.
```

> In the example below we show the different ways to stream subscribe to a topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below shows the different ways to stream subscribe to a topic.
```

	for {
		msg, err := sub.Receive()
		if err != nil {
			panic(err)
		}

		// Process the event

		// We _MUST_ always signal the result of processing the message, else the
		// message will not be considered as processed and will be redelivered or
		// dead lettered.
		// msg.Retry()
		// msg.Drop()
		if err := msg.Success(); err != nil {
			panic(err)
		}
	}
}
```

or

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"log"

	"github.com/dapr/go-sdk/client"
	"github.com/dapr/go-sdk/service/common"
)

func main() {
	cl, err := client.NewClient()
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	stop, err := cl.SubscribeWithHandler(context.Background(),
		client.SubscriptionOptions{
			PubsubName: "pubsub",
			Topic:      "orders",
		},
		eventHandler,
	)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	// Stop must always be called.
	defer stop()

	<-make(chan struct{})
}

func eventHandler(e *common.TopicEvent) common.SubscriptionResponseStatus {
	// Process message here
    // common.SubscriptionResponseStatusRetry
    // common.SubscriptionResponseStatusDrop
			common.SubscriptionResponseStatusDrop, status)
	}

	return common.SubscriptionResponseStatusSuccess
}
```

{{% /codetab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> 

Reviewer 2: @hhunter-ms  Suggest adding here is this video at this point and at this timing from the community call today. 
"Watch this video for an overview of streaming subscription"

https://youtu.be/57l-QDwgI-Y?t=841

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Demo

Watch [this video for an overview on streaming subscriptions](https://youtu.be/57l-QDwgI-Y?t=841):

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/57l-QDwgI-Y?si=EJj3uo306vBUvl3Y&amp;start=841" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

```

Reviewer: going to go ahead and sign off on adding the video embed.
